    Software Engineering-I



Data and Process Modeling
INTRODUCTION
’üĮ       During the requirements modeling process you used fact-finding
        techniques to investigate the current system and identify user
        requirements.
’üĮ       Now, you will use that information to develop a logical model of the
        proposed system and document the system requirements.
’üĮ       A logical model shows what the system must do, regardless of how
        it will be implemented physically.
’üĮ       Later, in the systems design phase, you build a physical model that
        describes how the system will be constructed.
’üĮ       Data and process modeling involves three main tools:
        ’üĮ   data flow diagrams,
        ’üĮ   a data dictionary,
        ’üĮ   and process descriptions.



    2                          Software Engineering-I
DATA FLOW DIAGRAMS
’üĮ       A data flow diagram (DFD) shows how data moves
        through an information system but does not show
        program logic or processing steps.
’üĮ       A set of DFDs provides a logical model that shows
        what the system does, not how it does it.




    3                          Software Engineering-I
DFD Symbols
’üĮ       DFDs use four basic symbols that represent
        processes, data flows, data stores, and entities.
’üĮ       Several different versions of DFD symbols exist, but
        they all serve the same purpose.
        ’üĮ   Gane and Sarson symbol set.
        ’üĮ   Yourdon symbol set.
’üĮ       Symbols are referenced by using all capital letters
        for the symbol name.




    4                              Software Engineering-I
PROCESS
’üĮ       A process receives input data and produces output
        that has a different content, form, or both.
’üĮ       Processes can be very simple or quite complex.
’üĮ       Processes contain the business logic, also called
        business rules, that transform the data and produce
        the required results.




    5                           Software Engineering-I
PROCESS SYMBOL
’üĮThe process name identifies a specific function and
 consists of a verb (and an adjective, if necessary)
 followed by a singular noun.
Examples
        ’üĮ   APPLY RENT PAYMENT, CALCULATE COMMISSION,
            ASSIGN FINAL GRADE, VERIFY ORDER, and FILL ORDER.
’üĮ       Processing details are not shown in a DFD.
’üĮ       For example, you might have a process named
        DEPOSIT PAYMENT.
’üĮ       The process symbol does not reveal the business logic
        for the DEPOSIT PAYMENT process.
’üĮ        To document the logic, you create a process description.
    6                              Software Engineering-I
Data flow diagram symbols, symbol names,
and examples




7                   Software Engineering-I
                                                          ContŌĆ”..
’üĮ       In DFDs, a process symbol can be referred to as a
        black box, because the inputs, outputs, and
        general functions of the process are known, but the
        underlying details and logic of the process are
        hidden.
’üĮ       We can zoom in on a process symbol and create a
        more in-depth DFD that shows the processŌĆÖs internal
        workings ŌĆö which might reveal even more
        processes, data flows, and data stores.
’üĮ       In this manner, the information system can be
        modeled as a series of increasingly detailed pictures.

    8                            Software Engineering-I
DATA FLOW
’üĮ       A data flow is a path for data to move from one
        part of the information system to another.
’üĮ       A data flow in a DFD represents one or more data
        items.
        ’üĮ   For example, a data flow could consist of a single data
            item (such as a student ID number) or
        ’üĮ   It could include a set of data (such as a class roster with
            student ID numbers, names, and registration dates for a
            specific class).




    9                                  Software Engineering-I
DATA FLOW SYMBOL
’üĮ    The symbol for a data flow is a line with a single or
     double arrowhead.
’üĮ    The data flow name appears above, below, or alongside
     the line.
’üĮ    A data flow name consists of a singular noun and an
     adjective, if needed.
’üĮ    Examples
     ’üĮ   DEPOSIT, INVOICE PAYMENT, STUDENT GRADE, ORDER,
         and COMMISSION.
’üĮ    Exceptions to the singular name rule are data flow
     names, such as GRADING PARAMETERS, where a
     singular name could mislead you into thinking a single
     parameter or single item of data exists.

    10                        Software Engineering-I
Examples of correct combinations of data
flow and process symbols.




                                  ŌĆóBecause a process changes
                                  the dataŌĆÖs content or form, at
                                  least one data flow must enter
                                  and one data flow must exit
                                  each process symbol.




11                   Software Engineering-I
 Examples of incorrect combinations of data
 flow and process symbols.


Spontaneous generation




        Black hole




        Gray hole



   12                    Software Engineering-I
DATA STORE
’üĮ    A data store is used in a DFD to represent data
     that the system stores because one or more
     processes need to use the data at a later time.
’üĮ    For instance, instructors need to store student
     scores on tests and assignments during the
     semester so they can assign final grades at the end
     of the term.
’üĮ    A DFD does not show the detailed contents of a data
     store




    13                       Software Engineering-I
DATA STORE SYMBOL
’üĮ    In a DFD, the Gane and Sarson symbol for a data store is a
     flat rectangle that is open on the right side and closed on the
     left side.
’üĮ    The name of the data store appears between the lines and
     identifies the data it contains.
’üĮ     A data store name is a plural name consisting of a noun and
     adjectives, if needed.
’üĮ    Examples of data store names are
     ’üĮ   STUDENTS, ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE, PRODUCTS, DAILY
         PAYMENTS, PURCHASE ORDERS, OUTSTANDING CHECKS,
         INSURANCE POLICIES, and EMPLOYEES.
’üĮ    Exceptions to the plural name rule are collective nouns that
     represent multiple occurrences of objects.
’üĮ    For example, GRADEBOOK represents a group of students
     and their scores.


    14                            Software Engineering-I
 Examples of correct uses of data store
 symbols in a data flow diagram.




ŌĆó A data store must be connected to a process with a data flow.
ŌĆó In each case, the data store has at least one incoming and one outgoing data
  flow and is connected to a process symbol with a data flow.
   15                                   Software Engineering-I
Examples of incorrect uses of data store
symbols




ŌĆó Two data stores cannot be connected by a data flow without an intervening
  process,
ŌĆó Each data store should have an outgoing and incoming data flow.


16                                   Software Engineering-I
                                                           ContŌĆ”.
’üĮ    In some situations, a data store has no input data
     flow because it contains fixed reference data that is
     not updated by the system.
’üĮ    For example,
     ’üĮ   Consider a data store called TAX TABLE, which contains
         withholding tax data that a company downloads from the
         Internal Revenue Service. When the company runs its
         payroll, the CALCULATE WITHHOLDING process
         accesses data from this data store.
     ’üĮ   On a DFD, this would be represented as a one-way
         outgoing data flow from the TAX TABLE data store into
         the CALCULATE WITHHOLDING process.

    17                            Software Engineering-I
ENTITY
’üĮ    A DFD shows only external entities that provide data
     to the system or receive output from the system.
’üĮ     A DFD shows the boundaries of the system and how
     the system interfaces with the outside world.
’üĮ    For example,
     ’üĮ   A customer entity submits an order to an order processing
         system.
     ’üĮ   Other examples of entities include a patient who supplies
         data to a medical records system, a homeowner who
         receives a bill from a city property tax system, or an
         accounts payable system that receives data from the
         companyŌĆÖs purchasing system.

    18                            Software Engineering-I
                                                         ContŌĆ”.
’üĮ    DFD entities also are called terminators, because they
     are data origins or final destinations.
’üĮ    Systems analysts call an entity that supplies data to the
     system a source, and an entity that receives data from
     the system a sink.
’üĮ     An entity name is the singular form of a department,
     outside organization, other information system, or
     person.
’üĮ     An external entity can be a source or a sink or both, but
     each entity must be connected to a process by a data
     flow.
     ENTITY SYMBOL
’üĮ    The symbol for an entity is a rectangle, which may be
     shaded to make it look three-dimensional.
’üĮ     The name of the entity appears inside the symbol.
    19                          Software Engineering-I
Examples of correct uses of external entities
in a data flow diagram




20                    Software Engineering-I
Examples of incorrect uses of external
entities




ŌĆó An external entity must be connected by a data flow to a process, and not
  directly to a data store or to another external entity.


21                                    Software Engineering-I
